- [Andrew Huberman] Welcome
to the Huberman Lab Podcast
where we discuss science
and science-based tools
for everyday life.
- I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology
and Ophthalmology at
Stanford School of Medicine.
Today I have the pleasure of introducing
Dr. Robert Sapolsky.
Dr. Sapolsky is a Professor of Biology
and Neurosurgery at Stanford University.
His laboratory has worked on
a large variety of topics,
including stress, hormones,
including testosterone and estrogen,
and how the different members
of a given species interact
according to factors like hormones,
hierarchy within primate troops,
and how things like stress, reproduction
and competition impact behavior.
One of the things that
makes Dr. Sapolsky's work
so unique is that it combines
elements from primatology,
including field studies
with human behavior,
in essence trying to unveil how
humans as old world primates
are controlled by different
elements of our biology
as well as our psychology.
Dr. Sapolsky is also a prolific
author of popular books,
such as "Why Zebras Don't Get Ulcers",
"The Trouble with Testosterone",
and "Behave: The Biology of
Humans at Our Best and Worst".
During the course of our discussion today,
Robert also revealed to me
that he is close to completing
a new book entitled,
"Determined: The Science
of Life Without Freewill."
And indeed we discuss the science of life
without freewill during this episode.
We also discuss stress and
how best to control stress
and how stress controls us at both,
conscious and subconscious levels.
We talk about testosterone and estrogen
and hormone replacement therapy
and how those impact
our mind, our psychology
and our interactions with others.
As with any discussion with Dr. Sapolsky,
we learn about scientific mechanisms
that make us who we are.
And today we also discuss tools
and how we can leverage
those scientific mechanisms
in order to be better
versions of ourselves.
I should mention that
unlike most guest interviews
on the Huberman Lab podcast,
this one had to be carried out remotely
due to various constraints,
so you may hear the
occasional audio artifact,
please excuse that.
We felt that the value of a
conversation with Dr. Sapolsky
was well-worth those
minor, minor glitches.
And indeed the information
that he delivers us
is tremendously valuable, interesting,
and in many cases actionable as well.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize
that this podcast is
separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire
and effort to bring zero
cost to consumer information
about science and science related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is ROKA,
ROKA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses
that are of the absolute highest quality.
The company was founded by
two All-American swimmers from Stanford,
and everything about the
design of the sunglasses
and eyeglasses was created
with performance in mind.
There are several things I like
about ROKA glasses so much.
One of them is that the aesthetic
of the glasses is great.
Unlike a lot of performance
glasses out there
that you can wear while swimming
and running but also indoors,
these glasses don't make
you look like a cyborg.
The aesthetic of them is really terrific,
and they have a lot of
different styles to select from.
In addition to that, the
quality of the lenses
on both the sunglasses
and eyeglasses are superb.
The optical clarity is great,
you can move from brightly
lit areas to shadowed areas,
and you don't get any degradation
in the quality of the visual image.
And that's absolutely essential.
If you'd like to try ROKA glasses,
you can go to roka.com and
enter the code Huberman
to save 20% off your first order.
That's ROKA.com and enter the
code Huberman at checkout.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a
personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood
and DNA to help you better
understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer
in getting regular blood work done.
And now with the advent
of quality DNA tests,
you can get a lot of
information about your genetics
and how that also impacts your immediate
and long-term health.
The reason I'm such a fan of
getting blood work done is
that it is really the
only way to understand
what's going on in your system at a level
that can really inform your decisions
about your immediate and long-term health.
The problem with a lot of
blood and DNA tests, however,
is that you get numbers
back about your hormones
and your metabolic factors, etc.,
but you don't know what to
do with that information.
With InsideTracker, they have
a very easy to use dashboard
that gives you that information,
and then gives you some
suggestions and directives
about things you could
change about your nutrition,
about your exercise and
other lifestyle factors
that can help you move those
numbers in the direction
that's best for you and for your health.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker,
you can go to InsideTracker.com/Huberman
to get 25% off
any of InsideTracker plans,
just use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by Belcampo.
Belcampo is a regenerative
farm in Northern California
that raises organic grass-fed
and finished certified humane meats.
I eat meat about once a day,
in general my lunch or my
breakfast consists of some meat,
and that meat has to be
of very high-quality,
and generally I'll eat
some vegetable as well.
And then I tend to eat pastas and rice
and things of that sort later
in the day or in the evening
in order to facilitate
the transition to sleep.
So I'm eating meat about once a day,
and I always insist
that the meat that I eat
be of the very highest quality
and that the animals were
raised and maintained humanely.
While conventionally raised
animals are confined to feedlots
and eat a diet of inflammatory grains,
Belcampo's animals graze on open pastures
and seasonal grasses resulting in meat
that's higher in nutrients
and healthy fats.
In addition, they raise
their animals in a way
that's not just better for our health,
but also has a positive
impact on the environment.
They practice regenerative agriculture,
which means the meat is climate positive
and carbon negative.
So you can feel good
about what you're eating
at the environmental level
and for sake of your health.
You can order Belcampo's
sustainably raised meats
to be delivered to you
by using my code Huberman
at Belcampo.com/Huberman and
entering my code Huberman
to get 20% off your first time order.
I'm partial to the ribeyes
or the New York steaks,
so on one day I might have a ribeye,
the next day I might
have a New York steak,
I also really like the meatballs,
I'm a particular fan of the meatballs.
So, again, that's Belcampo.com/Huberman
and enter the code Huberman
at checkout to get 20% off your order.
And now without further ado,
my conversation with Dr. Robert Sapolsky.
Great, well, thank you so much,
Robert, for joining us today.
I've been looking forward
to this for a very long time
and I appreciate it.
- Oh yes, glad to be here.
- There is an enormous range of topics
that we could drill into,
but just to start off,
I want to return to a topic that is
near and dear to your
heart, which is stress.
And one of the questions
that I get most commonly is,
what is the difference between
short and long-term stress
in terms of their benefits
and their drawbacks?
And the reason I say benefits is that,
obviously stress and the stress
response can keep us alive,
but stress, of course, can
also sharpen our mental acuity
and things of that sort.
So how should we conceptualize stress
and how should we conceptualize stress
in the short-term and in the long-term?
- Well, basically sort of two
graphs that one would draw.
The first one is just all
sorts of beneficial effects
of stress short-term,
and then once we get into chronicity,
it's just downhill from there.
Short-term because it saves
you from the predator,
short-term because you're
giving a presentation
and you think more clearly
or your focus is better,
all sorts of aspects of that.
And what then winds up
being an argument is,
how long does it take to go
from short-term to long-term?
And that's somewhat arbitrary,
but the sorts of chronic stressors
that most people deal
with are just undeniably
in the chronic range, like
having spent the last 20 years,
daily traffic jams or abusive
boss or some such thing.
The other curve that's sort
of perpendicular to this
is dealing with the fact
that sometimes stress is a great thing.
Like our goal is not to
cure people of stress
because if it's a right kind, we love it.
We pay good money to be stressed that way
by a scary movie or a rollercoaster ride.
What you wind up seeing is
when it's the right amount of stress,
it's what we call stimulation.
And the basic curve there is,
here is an optimal level of
stimulation and too little,
and function goes down with
what we would call boredom,
and too much and function goes down
with what we would call stress.
And the optimum is what all of us aim for.
- In terms of the benefits
of stress in the short-term,
one thing that's really striking to me is,
how physiologically the stress response
looks so much like the excitement response
to a positive event.
And we can speculate that
the fundamental difference
between short-term stress
and short-term excitement
is some neuromodulator like
dopamine or something like that.
But is there anything else that we know
about the biology that reveals to us?
What really creates this
thing we call valence
that an experience can be
terrible or feel awful,
or it can feel wonderful,
exhilarating depending on
this somewhat subjective
feature we call valence?
Do we know what valence
is or where it resides?
- On a really mechanical level,
if you're in a circumstance
that is requiring
that your heart races and
you're breathing as fast
and you're using your
muscles and some such thing,
you're going to to be
having roughly the same
brain activation profile,
whether this is for something wonderful
or something terrible with
the one exception being
that if the amygdala is
part of the activation,
this is something that's going
to be counting as adverse.
Whether that's the circumstance,
an adverse circumstance
recruiting the amygdala into it,
and how much it's the
amygdala being involved,
biases you towards interpreting
it as even more awful.
The amygdala in some ways
is kind of the checkpoint
as to whether we're talking
about excitement or terror.
- Let's use the amygdala
as a transition point
to another topic that you've
spent many years working on
and thinking about, which is testosterone
and other sex steroid hormones.
I heard you say once before that
among all the brain areas
that bind testosterone,
that where testosterone
can park and create effects
that the amygdala is among
the most chockablock full
of these parking spots,
these receptors.
I realize there's a lot here,
but how should we think
about the role of
testosterone in the amygdala
given that the engagement of
the amygdala is fundamental
in this transition point
between a exhilarating,
positive response and a
negative stressful response?
Or maybe just broadly,
how should we think about testosterone
and its effects on the brain?
- And pertinent to the transition from
whether this is a stressor
that's evoking fear
or revoking aggression in
terms of that continuum,
also because the amygdala
is in the center of all
four points on those axes.
Basically, almost everybody out there
has a completely wrong idea
as to what testosterone does,
which is testosterone makes you aggressive
because males, virtually
every species out there
have more testosterone
and a more aggressive
and seasonal measures
have testosterone surging
at the time of year, they're
punching it out over territory.
And you take testosterone
out of the picture,
you castrate any mammal
out there, including us,
and levels of aggression will go down.
And the easy thing then tends to conclude
that testosterone causes aggression.
And the reality is testosterone
does no such thing,
it doesn't cause aggression.
And you can see this both
behaviorally and in the amygdala.
What does testosterone do?
It lowers the threshold
for the sort of things
that would normally provoke
you into being [mumbles]
so that it happens more easily.
It makes systems that are
already turned on, turn on louder
rather than turning on aggressive
music or some such thing.
What does that look like behaviorally?
You take five male
monkeys, put them together,
they form a dominance hierarchy.
Number one is great,
number five is miserable,
number three is right in between.
Now take number three
and shoot the guy up
with tons of testosterone
and he's going to be
involved in more fights.
Aha, testosterone uniformly
causes aggression,
but you look closely and
there's a pattern to it,
is number three now
challenging numbers two and one
for their place in the hierarchy.
Absolutely not, he is brown-nosing them
exactly as much as he used to.
What's going on is he's
just a miserable terror
to poor number four and five.
And in that case, what
testosterone is doing
is amplifying the preexisting
patterns of aggression.
Amplifying the social learning,
that's where it'd gone into there.
Now on sort of the more reductive level,
so how does that translate
into the amygdala?
Does testosterone make amygdaloid neurons
have action potentials?
Does it cause those
neurons to suddenly speak
about fear and aggression spontaneously?
Absolutely not.
What they do is,
if the amygdala is
already being stimulated,
it increases the rate of neuronal firing.
What its worth?
It shortens after-hyperpolarizations.
So the theme there exactly is,
it's not creating your aggression,
it's just upping the volume of
whatever aggression is already there.
And once you factor that in,
it's impossible to say anything
about what testosterone does
outside the context of what
testosterone related behaviors,
how they get treated [laughs]
in your social settings.
- Mm-hmm, yeah.
And in terms of status
and the relationship
between individuals, either
nonhuman primates or humans,
can we say that testosterone
and levels of testosterone?
Or I should say, can we say
that relative levels of
testosterone between individuals
is correlated to status
within the hierarchy?
- Yes, but in a way that winds up
being totally uninteresting.
Like you go back on
whatever number of decades,
the endocrinology texts,
and there were two totally
reliable findings in there.
Let's see, I have a dog in here that's-
- Oh, good, we like dogs at
the Huberman Lab podcast.
- Oh, okay, it is jingling with that.
- They are welcome, they are
absolutely welcome, yeah.
- And there'd be two truisms,
which is higher levels of testosterone
predict higher levels of aggression
in humans and other animals.
Higher levels of testosterone
predict higher levels of sexual activity.
Whoa, testosterone causing both,
and the correlation is there.
And when you look closely, we've
got cause and effect stuff,
sexual behavior raises
testosterone levels,
aggression raises testosterone levels.
Your levels before had
were barely predictive
of what's going to happen,
so it's a response rather than a cause.
When you look at that though
in terms of making sense
of individual differences,
they don't matter a whole lot.
You can spend an entire career
on the social circumstances
that produce 3.5% more
testosterone in the circulation,
and expect to see all sorts
of interesting implications.
And that's not really the case,
it's somewhat of a yes or no modulator
of the much more subtle social
stuff that's already there.
- Very interesting.
I think that there are
a lot of misconceptions
about human biology, but
testosterone seems to be one area
where at least from what I
can find on the internet,
it's sort of at the peak
of misunderstanding.
Maybe we could just ask
a few more questions
about testosterone and sexual behavior
because there's an interesting story there
about castration versus non-castration
and the causality, again.
But before you address that,
I just want to highlight
something that you said
that I think is so vital,
which is that behaviors,
such as aggressive behaviors
and sexual behaviors
can actually increase testosterone.
Did I hear that correctly?
- Yeah.
- And the reverse is sort of
true, but not in a causal way.
Is that right?
- The opposite direction
of the causality, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, so if I were to increase
somebody's testosterone by 30%,
male or female doesn't matter,
their sexual behavior
may or may not change.
- Essentially zero effect at all.
Your brain is not that sensitive
to fluctuations in testosterone levels.
In terms of things like aggression,
raising testosterone,
this is a great footnote.
If you have the right type of
willing to die on the trenches
devotion sort of thing,
watching your favorite team play a sport
will raise your testosterone levels
as you sit there with the
potato chips in your armchair.
So it's not the physicality of aggression,
it's the psychological framing of it.
So, yeah, testosterone
is not causing that.
And a great way to appreciate that is,
okay, so you had all these testosterone
sexual behavior correlations,
and you do the definitive
endocrine intervention,
which is you do a subtraction study,
you've removed the testes.
And as I said before, levels
of sexual behavior goes down.
Good, we've just shown
that testosterone is
somehow have caused it.
Critically they go down,
but not down to zero,
whether you are a rat or a
monkey or a human, whatever.
And what predicts how much residual
sexual behavior is there,
how much sexual behavior
there was before castration?
What that's telling you is by then
that's behavior that's being
carried by social learning
and context rather than by the hormone,
exact same thing with aggression.
Drops after castration,
doesn't go to zero,
the more prior history of it,
the more it just keeps
coasting along on its own
even without testosterone.
- Very interesting.
Can we say that there is an exception
in terms of the early
organizing effects of hormones?
Like, for instance, if a
developing animal is deprived of
a testosterone or estrogen
or aromatized testosterone into estrogen,
there's a whole story there is, you know.
But then I could imagine that
the circuits of the brain
that are responsible for
initiating sexual behavior
in the first place might not emerge,
and therefore not be sensitive
to the testosterone later in life.
Is that right?
Okay.
- Yeah, exactly.
And a great way of seeing that
is this totally nutty biological factoid,
which is the second to
fourth digit ratio enhanced.
- Oh yeah.
- Totally obscure thing, the
ratio of one to the other
in some way reflects
levels of testosterone,
androgen exposure during fetal life.
And I can't remember which
way it goes and it's minuscule
and you need a thousand
people in your sample size
to be able to see anything,
but you see it in other primates,
it's already there in fetal
sonograms, all of that.
So that's a readout of subtle differences
in prenatal exposure,
and that winds up being a
predictor of a whole range of
sort of stuff in adult behavior.
So, yeah, at the fetal end,
when you're still building everything,
testosterone and the amount of that
is making a huge difference.
By the time you're an adult,
it's just somewhat of
an old and a non-signal.
- Yeah, I have a confession,
which is that I was a
master's student at Berkeley
in Marc Breedlove's arena, so
I'm an author on that paper,
although I'm deep within the author line,
and you got the description
of it exactly right
that it's the D2, the index
finger to the ring finger ratio
is more similar in females
than it is in males.
In males, the index finger
tends to be shorter.
And for people out there
who are listening to this
who are now freaking out or measuring,
that there is a proper way
to measure this, which is,
eyeballing it doesn't work all the time
unless at the extremes.
And there's some very
interesting stories there.
It actually has been replicated
no fewer than five times,
Marc Breedlove tells me.
But yes, in terms of these
early organizing effects,
those seem very robust in most studies.
These later effects are
sort of activation of
neural circuits by hormones.
I'm absolutely fascinated by this.
And I do have a couple other questions,
which is, we normally associate
testosterone with males,
but of course, females
make testosterone as well
from the adrenals and
presumably elsewhere too.
I'm guessing if we looked hard enough,
we'd probably find that
there were other sources
of androgens in females.
Can we say
that these general contours
of effects on aggression
also pertain to females?
And I suppose I should ask in particular
about female-female aggression,
which does exist in many species,
female-male agregression as
well as maternal aggression,
which is a robust aspect of
our evolution, of course,
that the mother will,
an angry mother animal
of any kind protecting her
young is truly dangerous,
in the best sense of the word.
- And that type of post-parturition,
period after birth aggression
is all about estrogen,
progesterone, those sorts of things.
Female aggression, the rest of the time
has testosterone as a major
player at a much lower level
on the average.
On the average, one always has to say,
but it's basically the same punchlines.
In females, the lower levels
of testosterone are essential
for typical levels of
aggression and sexual behavior.
Nonetheless, they're not causing it,
it's not sensitive to small
individual differences.
Same exact thing.
You can get way over-impressed
with the importance of
androgens in females
just as readily as in males.
- So in line with that,
how should we conceptualize testosterone?
I realize there isn't a single sentence
that can capture a
hormone in all its effects
because hormones have
so many different slow
and fast effects on the brain,
on other glands on their own,
on the very glands that produce them.
But as I've heard you talk
about testosterone today
and over the years, I
start to get the impression
that as the most misunderstood molecule
[laughs] in human health in the universe,
it's clearly doing
something very powerful.
It's shifting the way that
certain neural circuits work,
adjusting the gain on the
amygdala, as you described,
and certainly other things as well.
Is there any truism
about testosterone like,
and its relationship to effort
or its relationship to resilience,
and in a way that maybe will
help me and other people
to sort of think about how
to think about testosterone?
- Yeah.
Maybe three separate answers to that.
The first one is, I think
it's a fair summary to think
that when it comes to
motivated strong behaviors,
what testosterone does is make you
more of whatever you already are.
And that to me, sexual arousal,
libido, aggressiveness,
spontaneous aggression,
reactive aggression, things of that sort.
It's upping the volume of things
that are already strongly there.
Second way to think about it is,
well, here's like my favorite
finding about testosterone.
And this was some wonderful
work by a guy, John Wingfield,
who's one of the best behavioral
endocrinologists out there.
And about 20 years ago he
formulated what was called
The Challenge Hypothesis
of Testosterone in Action.
What does testosterone do?
Testosterone is what you secrete
when your status is being challenged,
and it makes it more likely that you'll do
the behaviors needed to
hold onto your status.
Okay, so that's totally
boringly straightforward
if you are a baboon.
If somebody is challenging your high rank,
the appropriate response on your part
is going to be aggression.
All right, so we've just got
in through the back door,
testosterone and aggression, again.
But then you get to humans,
and humans have lots of
different ways of achieving
or maintaining status.
And all you need to do is go to like some
fancy private school's annual auction,
and you will see all these
half-drunk alpha males
competing to see who can
give the most money away
as a show of conspicuous like
property that they have.
And in a setting like that, I mean,
I haven't been able to take urine samples,
if there's times, unfortunately,
but that shows the flip side of it.
If you have a species
that hands out status
in a very different sort of way,
testosterone is going to boost that also.
Okay, so that generates a
totally nutty prediction.
Wow, take people in a circumstance,
say playing an economic game
where you get status by being trustworthy
and being generous in your
interactions with the game.
If you give people testosterone,
does that make them more generous?
And that's absolutely the case.
Totally cool finding.
I'm showing you, I don't know,
basically if you took a
whole bunch of Buddhist monks
and shot them up with testosterone,
they'd get all competitive with each other
as to who could do the most
random acts of kindness.
And if we have a societal
problem with too much aggression,
the first culprit to look
at is not testosterone,
the first to look at is
that we hand out so much
damn elevated status
for aggression in so many circumstances.
So I find that finding to be fantastic.
Third thing about
subtlety of testosterone.
Okay, so like some subtler
behavioral effects,
you give testosterone to people
and they become more confident,
they become more self-confident.
Well, that's good, people pay to take
all sorts of nonsensical self-help courses
that will boost your self-esteem.
And that's a good thing
unless testosterone
makes you more confident,
that is inaccurate,
and you're more likely to
barrel into wrong decisions.
What's shown in economic game
play is that testosterone
by making you more confident
makes you less cooperative
because who needs to cooperate
because I'm on top of this all on my own.
Testosterone makes people
cocky and impulsive.
And that might be great in one setting,
but if and the other is,
you're absolutely sure your army is to
get over on the other
country in three days.
So hell, let's start World War I,
and you get a big surprise out of it.
Testosterone altering
risk assessment beforehand
probably played a big role in
that kind of miscalculation.
- Super-interesting.
I always think about testosterone
and dopamine being close
cousins in the brain,
not just because of their relationship
through the pituitary and hypothalamus.
That, of course, but also because
of dopamine's salient role
in creating this bias
towards exteroception.
When somebody takes a drug,
with it increases dopamine,
or they're chockablock full of dopamine.
They tend, I want to highlight 'tend'
because this is, I'm
really generalizing here,
but they tend to focus on outward goals,
things beyond the
boundaries of their skin.
And testosterone seems
to do a bit of the same,
it tends to put us into a similar mode of
perceiving the outside world in ways
that we're asking questions like,
how do I relate to this
other of my species?
How do I relate to these goals?
Is there anything that we can
do to better conceptualize
the relationship between testosterone
and dopamine and motivation?
Or would that just take
us down the alleyways of,
of neural pathways and the hypothalamus?
Which is fine too.
- Well, I think it's got lots to do with
sort of this massive
revisionism about dopamine.
Everyone, since the pharaohs
got brought up being taught
that dopamine is about
pleasure and reward.
It turns out it isn't, it's
about anticipation of reward,
and it's about generating the motivation,
the goal-directed behavior
needed to go get that reward.
And before you know it, you're
using like elevated dopamine,
your entire life to motivate you to do
whatever is going to get
you like entry into heaven
after-life kind of, it's
doing that sort of thing.
So it's really about the motivation.
And what testosterone
does even in individuals
who are not aggressive and
why testosterone replacement
is often a very helpful
thing for aging males is
it increases energy, it
increases a sense of thereness,
a presence of alertness
that increases motivation.
So that's a whole aspect,
which then takes us into
is your motivation to get up and like go,
hand out lots of soup in a soup
kitchen for homeless people,
or is it to get up and go
ethnically cleanse a village.
It's got much to do with
what your makeup was
before the testosterone got onboard.
So it's activating in an energetic sense,
testosterone within minutes
increases glucose uptake
into skeletal muscle.
You're just more awake
and alert and all of that,
and that has a lot to do
with what dopamine does.
And as one might predict then,
getting just the right
levels of testosterone
infused into your bloodstream
feels great to lab rats.
They will lever press to
get infused into the range
that optimizes dopamine release.
So there is, you are absolutely right,
they're deeply intertwined.
- Yeah, such beautiful biology there.
And I love the way you
encapsulate their relationship.
I want to ask about estrogen,
we don't hear about estrogen as often,
and it's always
interesting to me now doing
some public facing education,
that testosterone is this
very controversial molecule,
just to say it is almost
controversial. [laughs]
[Robert laughs]
But estrogen doesn't seem
to hold the same controversial weight,
and yet estrogen has a
very powerful effects
on both the animal brain
and on the human brain
of males and females.
Men do not want their
estrogen to go too low.
Terrible things happen, they
will lose cognitive function,
libido can drop.
So men need estrogen as well,
but perhaps maybe we can put
the same filter on estrogen
as we did on testosterone.
Are there any general themes of estrogen
that people should be aware of
or that you think that are
generally misunderstood?
Is it really all about
feelings and empathy
and making us more sensitive?
I sense not.
- No, and it's once again
very context dependent.
And if estrogen after giving
birth is playing a central role
in you wanting to shred
the face of somebody
getting too close to your
kittens kind of thing,
we know it's not just warm,
fuzzy, empathic kind of stuff.
Estrogen in lots of ways
could be summarized by,
if you've got a choice in the matter
between having a lot of estrogen
in your bloodstream or not,
go for having a lot of estrogen.
It enhances cognition,
exactly as you said,
it stimulates neurogenesis
in the hippocampus,
it increases glucose and oxygen delivery,
it protects you from dementia,
it decreases inflammatory
oxidative damage to blood vessels,
which is why it's good for protecting
from cardiovascular disease
in contrast to testosterone,
which is making everyone
of those things worse.
This springs up this
minefield with a question,
which is, so what about
post-menopausal estrogen?
And all sorts of lab studies
with non-human primates
suggested that you keep
estrogen levels high
after a monkey's equivalent of menopause.
And you're going to keep
brain health a lot better
or decreasing the risk
of dementia, stroke,
every such thing.
Estrogen is a great
antioxidant, all of that.
So in the 90s I think
when Healy, I'm forgetting her name,
but when there was the first
female head of the NIH,
Bernadine Healy set up this
massive prospective human study,
what was going to be the
biggest one of all times,
looking at the pluses and minuses
of post-menopausal estrogen.
And tens of thousands of
women, and this was...
And they had to cut the study short
because what they were seeing was,
estrogen was not only
doing the normal bad stuff
that you expect in terms of
some decalcification stuff,
but it was increasing the risk
of cardiovascular disease,
and it was increasing the risk of stroke,
and it was increasing
the risk of dementia.
And this ground to a halt and everybody,
they stopped the study and front page news
and everybody panned at that point.
And nobody could make sense of it
who had been spending the
last 20 years studying
the exact same thing in primates
and seeing all the protective effects.
And the explanation turned
out to be one of those things
where like the law of
unexpected consequences.
Okay, menopause in women,
it lasts different lengths of time,
that may be a factor that's going to come.
You know what, let's not start
giving our study subjects
more estrogen until they're
totally past menopause.
And when you've got that
lag time in between,
you shift all sorts of
estrogen receptor patterns,
and that's where all of
the bad effects come from.
- Wow!
- All of the monkey studies
had involved just maintaining
ovulatory levels into the
post-menopausal period.
And you do that and you get great effects.
Estrogen is one of the
greatest predictors of
protection from Alzheimer's
disease, all of that,
but it needs to be physiological.
Just keep continuing what
your body has been doing
for a long time versus let
the whole thing shutdown
and suddenly like try to
fire up the coal stoves
at the bottom of the
basement kind of thing,
and get that going,
there you get utterly different outcomes.
And that caused a lot of
human health consequences
when people suddenly decided that estrogen
is in fact neurologically
endangering post-menopausally.
- Wow, that's fascinating.
And I never thought that these
steroid hormone receptors
could by not binding estrogen,
being devoid of estrogen
binding, I should say,
could then set off opposite
biochemical cascades.
Fascinating.
I guess it raises the question
about testosterone replacement too,
whether or not people should
[laughs] talk to their
doctor before too long.
Men and women talk to your
physicians before too long
to avoid these, whatever is
happening in these periods
where there isn't sufficient
testosterone and/or estrogen.
It sounds like could
cause longer-term problems
even when therapies are introduced.
- Two additional misery
slash complications.
So, okay, you're trying to understand,
you look at women with a history
with or without post-menopausal
estrogen replacement
where it's done great.
And you're seeing 20 years later,
estrogen is a predictor of a
decreased risk of Alzheimer's.
Then you got to start
trying to do the unpacking
prospective type studies.
How much estrogen?
At which times?
Estrogen is a catchall term
for a bunch of hormones,
estrone, estradiol, estriol.
How much of each one of them?
Natural or synthetic?
Go try to figure all of that out.
And the second complication is,
it's often hard to say anything
about what estrogen does
outside the context of
what progesterone is doing.
And often it's not the
absolute levels of either,
it's the ratio of the two.
This is such a more
complicated endocrine system
than testosterone.
And because you have to
generate dramatic cyclicity
that like no male hypothalamus
ever has to dream off.
It's a much, much more complicated system,
thus, it's a lot more
complicated to understand,
let alone like figure out what
the ideal benefits are of it.
- Yeah.
I don't know what to
make of the literature on
dropping rates of testosterone
and endocrine disruptors.
I was at Berkeley when Tyrone Hayes
published his data on these frogs
that were drinking water
from various locations
throughout the United States,
not just in California,
and seeing very severe
endocrine disruption
through blockade or,
and of androgen receptors
and all sorts of issues.
And you hear this all the time now
that sperm counts are dropping,
that there are all these
endocrine disruptors
that there's birth control in the water,
in the drinking water.
It all starts to sound a little crazy,
and yet I've also been fooled before by,
I guess a good example would be,
there's a lot of crazy
stuff in the world online
about all the terrible stuff
in highly processed foods.
And yet you've got very
respectable people,
endocrinologists at UCSF
like Robert Lustig saying,
yeah, a lot of these hidden sugars
and these emulsifiers,
they're causing real problems.
So I've become more
open-minded about the question.
And so, are we suffering
from drops in sperm counts
and testosterone and
estrogen and fertility
as a consequence of endocrine disruptors
in the environments and food,
or because of social reasons?
Is there anything that
we can hang our hat on
like real data that you're confident in?
Or is it just a mess?
- No, the phenomenon does
appear to be quite real.
Cross-sectional studies,
human populations,
or I still don't understand why this was
one of the first things
that Hayes spotted.
Decreasing testicle size in crocodiles.
[Andrew laughs]
Go figure why that was
one of the first contributions to this.
And I think the phenomenon
is absolutely real.
And what you're then left with
is two classic challenges,
which is this is correlated with
something broad environmental toxins.
Which ones, how much, when, etc.?
And the other one always
being, well, okay,
dropping is a dropping
enough to make a difference.
How big of an effect is this?
And those are where the
juries are still out.
- Yeah, it's an area that I know
there's a lot of interest in,
and you've got groups of people
who won't touch a receipt at a store
because of the BPAs that
are on the inks of the...
And then [laughs] you've got people
who don't care about those things.
It is a fascinating area.
I hope that more biology
will be done there soon.
I'd like to briefly return to stress.
You described a study once about two rats,
one running on a wheel voluntarily,
one who is basically
stuck in a running wheel,
and it's forced to run
anytime, rat number one runs.
So in one case the rat is
voluntarily exercising. [laughs]
And in the other case,
the rat is being forced
to go to PE class, so to speak,
but really, and seeing
divergent effects on biology.
And I'd like to just
touch into this and use it
as kind of a case study for
stress mitigation in general.
I'm rather obsessed in our
colleague, David Spiegel,
Associate Chair of Psychiatry at Stanford
is obsessed with this question of,
how humans can start to
mitigate their own stress?
What do you think about stress mitigation
and what should we do as
individuals and as families
and as a culture to try
and encourage people
to mitigate their stress, but in ways
that are not going to turn
us into rat number two,
where we're being forced
to mitigate our own stress
and therefore it becomes
more stressful. [laughs]
- And what you see is, rat number one gets
all the benefits of exercise.
Rat number two gets all the
downsides of severe stress
with the same exact muscle expenditure
and movements going on.
Perfectly yoked, great example
that it's the interpretation on your head.
And I haven't kept up
with that literature,
but I'll bet you, rat number two
is having a whole lot more
activity in its amygdala
than is rat number one.
Okay, so stress mitigation.
Anything I should say here
I should preface with,
I'm reasonably good at telling people
what's going to happen if they
don't manage their stress,
but I'm terrible at actually
like managing stress
or advising how to manage that.
I'm much better with the
bad news aspect of it.
But what you see is, by now
just a classic literature,
half a century old, sort of showing
what are the building blocks of stress.
Not, ooh, you step outside
and you've been gored by an elephant,
and can you grow from your experience?
And what doesn't kill
you makes you stronger.
In that you could have a stress response,
but you're in the realm of the gray zone
of ambiguous social
interactions, that sort of thing.
Some people have massive stress responses,
others not at all, in between, enjoy it.
Like what are the building blocks of,
what makes psychological stress stressful?
And the first one is exactly
what is brought up by that running study.
Do you have a sense of control?
A sense of control makes
stressors less stressful.
And the running wheel shows
that or studies where you,
you lab rat or you
college freshman volunteer
have been trained that
by pressing a lever,
you're less likely to get a shock.
And today you're at the
lever they're working away
and unbeknownst to you the
lever has been turned off,
and it has no effect on shock frequency,
but because you think
you have some control,
you have less of a stress response.
If you were a rat and doing
this day-in and day-out,
you're less likely to get an ulcer.
So a sense of control.
And related to that is a
sense of predictability.
Rat get shocked, human
gets shocked, whatever,
and the scenario either is
the shocks come now and then,
or the shocks come now and then,
and 10 seconds before a
little warning light comes on.
And when you get the warning light,
the shocks are distressful.
You got predictability
because if you're not
getting warning lights,
any second you could be a half second away
from the next shock.
You get a warning light,
and you know that if there isn't one,
you've got at least 10
seconds worth of relaxation.
You know what's coming,
you can prepare your coping responses,
and best of all afterward you
know when you're finally safe,
when you can recover from it.
And that's enormously protective.
Others outlet for frustration,
you take a rat who is getting shocked,
and if it could run on a running wheel,
that's a protective thing,
that's doing it voluntarily.
If you've got a rat and he
can gnaw on a bar of wood,
a stressor is less stressful.
Unfortunately, if you have
a rat or primate or human
and they're stressed, the
ability to aggressively dump on
somebody smaller and weaker
also reduces the stress response.
And the fact that displacement
aggression reduces stress
accounts for a huge percent
triggers like unhappiness.
So all of those are variables,
get social support as well.
That's a good one.
Interpreting circumstances is being
good news rather than bad.
Hurray, so you've got this very simple
sort of like take home recipe of go out
and get as much control
and as much predictability
and as many outlets and as much
social support as possible,
and you're going to do just fine.
And you go out and do that,
and that's a recipe for total disaster
because it's much, much
more subtle than that.
In one great example, okay,
so you're getting shocks,
you want a warning beforehand,
get a little warning light
10 seconds before each shock,
it's wonderfully protective.
Get a warning light one
second before the shock
doesn't do anything.
There's not enough time for you to get
the psychological benefits
of the anticipation.
Now instead, gets the
little warning coming on
two minutes before each shock,
and it's going to make things worse
because you're not going to
be sitting there like reveling
and sort of your sense of predictability,
and it's soon going to be, oh.
You're going to be sitting
there for two minutes saying,
damn, here it comes.
Predictive information only
works in a narrow domain.
Similarly, control.
Do you want to have a sense of
control on the face of stress?
And the answer is, only if it
is a mild to moderate stressor
because what's happening then,
your sense of control is
completely independent
of the reality of whether
you have control or not,
but in the face of mild
to moderate stressors,
a sense of control gets interpreted as,
wow, look how much worse
things could have been.
Thank God, I have control,
I'm on top of this to master my fate.
In contrast, if it's a major stressor,
all that arbitrary sense of control does
is make you think,
oh my God, look how much
better it could have been.
I could have prevented it.
And we all know that intuitively
like we do that in the face
of people's worst stressors.
Nobody could have stopped the car
the way the kids suddenly jumped out.
It wouldn't have mattered
and if you had gotten them
to the doctor a month ago,
instead of now, it
wouldn't have made any...
You didn't actually have any control.
And what you see is,
you absolutely want to have
a huge sense of control
over mild to moderate stressors,
and especially ones that
result in a good outcome.
Hooray, for me, and in the
face of horrible stressors,
what you want to do is
like self-deception,
and like truth and beauty
don't necessarily go
hand-in-hand at that point.
And that's why stress management
techniques impact control
and predictability wind up
being far worse than neutral
if you're preaching that
to somebody homeless
or somebody with terminal cancer,
or somebody who is a refugee.
Tell a neurotic middle-class person
that they have the psychological tools
to turn hell into heaven.
And there's some truth to that.
Do the same thing to somebody
who is going through a real hell,
and that's just privileged heartlessness
to do that because that doesn't work.
More and more outlets, if
your outlets are damaging,
that's not a good way to mitigate stress.
Social support, if you're
confusing mere acquaintances
for real social support,
you're going to have the rug pulled out
from under you at some point.
If you're mistaking
social support for being,
going and bitching and moaning
and demanding supportiveness
from everyone around you
rather than you doing
some of that reciprocally,
that's not going to work very well either.
It's not simple.
It's not for nothing that
lots of us are really lousy.
It, like being good friends
and things like that,
and why it takes a lot
of work to do it right?
Because you do it wrong
and it may temporarily
seem like a great thing,
but when it turns out to be
completely misplaced faith,
you're going to be feeling
worse than before you started.
- Interesting.
These days, there's a lot of interest in
using physical practices
to mitigate stress,
trying to get out of the ruminating,
and to some extent take
control of neural circuits
in the brain by using exercise
and using breathing and hypnosis.
And, of course, hypnosis has
a mental component as well.
What are your thoughts
on stress mitigation
from the standpoint of,
okay, so we don't want
to be rat number two,
we want to select something for ourselves,
so we have to take the
initiative for ourselves.
Being forced into exercising is not,
it could actually have
negative health effect perhaps.
So we need to pick something that we like,
we need to take control of it.
In terms of supporting other people,
you touched on that a bit.
What is the best way to
support other people?
Is it to talk about the stressful thing?
I mean, I'm not asking you
to play psychologist here,
but I find divergent data on this.
We can spin ourselves up into a lather
by ruminating on something.
And language seems to me
like it's a wonderful tool,
but it's also a fairly deprived tool
because it doesn't really get into
the core of our physiology
like something like breathing would.
So what are your thoughts on more,
for lack of a better way to
put it, more head-centered,
cognitive approaches to stress mitigation
versus kind of going
at the core physiology.
Cold showers now are even
a thing to some extent
just to get people stress acclimated,
voluntarily taking cold showers.
- That makes some sense physiologically,
preconditioning for when
the real stressors come.
In terms of what you bring up,
oh, transcendental meditation,
mindfulness, exercise,
prayer, sort of reflecting on gratitude,
all that sort of thing.
Collectively they work on the average,
they work in terms of,
they can lower heart rate
and cholesterol levels and have
all sorts of good outcomes,
but they compromise us.
One is exactly the caveat
that comes out of the
running wheel study is,
it doesn't matter how
many of your friends swear
by the stress management technique.
If doing it makes you want to scream
your head off after 10 seconds,
that's not the one that's
going to work for you.
So read the fine print
and the testimonials,
but it's got to be something
that works for you.
Another one is the stress
management type techniques
that work, you can't save
them for the weekend,
you can't save them for
when you're stuck on
hold on the phone with
Muzak for two minutes.
It's got to be something where
you stop what you're doing
and do it virtually,
daily or every other day,
and spend 20, 30 minutes doing it.
And what you see coming
out of that is this
like 80/20 rule from economics.
80/20, 80% of the complaints
in the store come from
20% of the customers, things like that.
What you see is, if your
entire life consists of
every single thing on your shoulders,
that you can't say no to 24/7.
If you've stopped that and finally said,
my wellbeing is important enough
that I'm finally get to
say no to some of the stuff
that I can't say no to.
And I'm going to do it
every day for 20 minutes,
whatever stress management technique
you then do in those 20
minutes sort of who knows what,
you're already 80% of the way there
simply by having decided your
wellbeing is important enough
that you're going to stop every single day
and have that as a priority.
And that's exactly the same finding
that you find people with
chronic depression untreated
that merely calling and
getting an appointment
to see a mental health professional,
people start feeling better already
because it's evidence that
you've been activated,
and you matter enough to do this,
and you could conceive
that this would actually
have a good outcome rather
than a hopeless one.
Just doing something meditative
or reflective every day or so,
and it hardly even matters
which one you're doing.
And what comes out of that
is thus another warning,
which is do not trust anybody who says,
it has been scientifically proven
that their brand of stress management
works better than the other ones.
Just watch your wallet at that point.
- Yeah, amen.
I think one of the core goals of my lab
and David Spiegel's lab,
and I know you've worked with David
and published papers with David as well
is to really try and find out
what are the various
entry points to this thing
that we call the autonomic nervous system
and the stress system,
and these systems that when gone unchecked
really can take us down a dark path.
And the idea that there
are so many entry points
is really the one that keeps,
what the data keep telling
us over and over again.
So there's no magic
breathing tool or exercise,
it's any variety of those or one of those.
And, again, we come back to this idea
that it's the one that you select
and the one that you make space for,
and it's the one that you hopefully enjoy
that's going to work best
in terms of physiology.
- And [mumbles] benign for those people
who were stuck around you.
- Right, right, absolutely.
And that brings me to this question of,
I find it amazing that
how we perceive an event,
and whether or not we chose
to be in that event or not
can have such incredible different effects
on circuitry of the brain
and circuitry of the body
and biology of cells.
And in some ways it boggles my mind,
like how can a decision made presumably
with the prefrontal cortex,
although other parts of the brain as well,
how can that change
essentially the polarity
of a response in the body.
And, I mean, you've talked before
about Type A personalities in there.
We don't have to go into
all the detail there
for sake of time, but it is interesting
that the effects of endothelial cells.
I mean, literally of the size of, [laughs]
of the portals for blood
are in opposite direction,
depending on whether or not somebody
wants to be in a situation
as a highly motivated person.
Maybe you could just give
us the top contour of that
because I think it really illustrates
this principle so beautifully.
And then maybe if you would,
you could just speculate on
how the brain might
have this switch to turn
one experience from terrible to beneficial
or from beneficial to terrible,
it's really fascinating.
- Well, all you need to do is like tonight
before you're going to sleep
and you're lying in bed
and you're nice and drowsy
and your heart's beating nice and slow,
you start thinking about the fact that
that heart isn't going to beat forever.
[Andrew laughs]
And imagine your toes
getting cold afterward
and imagine the flow of
blood coming to a halt
and all of you clotting.
You're going to be doing
something with your physiology
at that point that 99% of
mammals out there only do
if they're running frantically.
And you're going to be turning on your
sympathetic stress response with thought,
with emotions, with memory.
And the measure of that is
just how much the cortex
and the limbic system
sends projections down
to all the autonomic
regulators in the brain.
You can think autonomic
regulatory neurons into action
in ways that only other animals can do
with like extremes of
environmental circumstances.
And given that and the autonomic rule,
I mean, the other big
challenge in understanding it
is gigantic individual differences.
And that's,
when you talk about the
optimal amount of stress,
the counts of stimulation,
and in general that stress
that's not too severe
and doesn't go on for too long
and there is overall in
a benevolence setting.
And under those conditions,
we'd love being stressed
by something unexpected and
out of control predictability
like a really interesting plot turn
in the movie you're watching.
That's great, but you get
the individual differences
that somehow has to accommodate the fact
that for some people, the
perfect stimulatory amount
of stress is like getting up early
for an Audubon birdwatching
walk next Sunday morning.
And for somebody else,
it's signing up to be
like a mercenary in Yemen.
[Andrew laughs]
And tremendous individual differences
that swamp any simple prescriptions.
- Yeah, the prefrontal cortex,
this thinking machinery
that we all harbor, it's
such a double-edged sword.
And what's remarkable to me is,
how the areas of the brain
like the hypothalamus
and the amygdala, they're
sort of like switches.
I mean, there is context
and there is gain control.
You talked about the gain
control by testosterone, etc.,
but they're really like switches.
I mean, if you stimulate
ventromedial hypothalamus,
you get the right neurons,
an animal will try and kill even an object
that's sitting next to it.
You tickle some other neurons,
it'll try and mate with that same object.
I mean, it's really wild.
I think there are probably
rules to prefrontal cortex also,
but it sounds like the context plural
from which prefrontal cortex can draw from
is probably infinite, so
that we could probably learn
to perceive threat in anything.
Whether or not it's another group
or whether or not it's science
or whether or not it's
somebody's version of
the shape of the earth versus another.
I mean, it's like, you can
plug in anything to this system
and give it enough data,
and I think it sounds like you
could drive a fear response
or a love response.
Is that overstepping?
- Or [laughs] a mixed
horribly ambivalent one
that is changing by the millisecond,
and then like could be
mutually contradictory.
No, that's absolutely the case
in the prefrontal cortex,
I more than once have regretted
having like wasted 30 years
of my life studying the hippocampus
then I shoot him and studied
the prefrontal cortex
because it's so much more
interesting what it does,
and it's all this contextual stuff.
It's all the ways in which
it's not okay to lie in this setting,
but it's a great thing in another.
It's not okay to kill
unless you do it to them,
and then you get a medal.
It's not, all of this social context
and moral relativity and
situational ethic stuff,
that's the prefrontal cortex
that's got to master that.
And that winds up meaning
that's the place in your brain
more than anywhere where you
say your perception of things
can powerfully influence the reality
of what's coming into you.
- Yeah.
- I mean,
a great example, just
harking back to testosterone.
Okay, so exercise boosts
up testosterone levels.
Does exercise and success do it more
than exercise and failure?
A literature back in the 80s or so
looking at outcomes of marathons.
Did testosterone rise more in the people
who win than the losers?
Wrestling matches.
Things of that sort
with a simple prediction
and the answer wound up being,
you didn't see a simple answer.
Okay, you win the marathon,
that's not necessarily a predictor
of increased testosterone.
What's that about?
And then you find like the
winner testosterone decreases,
and you find out the guy who came in 73rd
is having a massive testosterone increase.
Whoa, what's that about?
What's that about is
far more human subtlety.
The guy who won the race has
a decline in testosterone
because he came in three minutes later
than he really, really was expecting.
And everybody now is
going to be writing it up
about how he's over the hill.
And the guy who came in 73rd
is having a boost of testosterone
because he was assuming he'd
be dead from a heart attack
by the third mile,
[Andrew laughs]
and instead he managed to finish.
It's this interpretive
stuff going on in there,
and that's what prefrontal
cortex is about.
- Amazing, it raises this
question of cognitive flexibility,
Can we tell ourselves that
something is good for us
even if we're not enjoying it?
And can we wriggle around these corners of
choosing the exercise or doing the...
Personally I'm not a big fan
of long bouts of meditation,
but I've benefited
tremendously from things like
dedicated breathing and
shorter rounds of meditation.
Can I tell myself that it's good for me
and wriggle around the corner
and get my physiology
working the way I want?
Do we have cognitive flexibility?
Can I be that third place
runner and tell myself,
well, at least I came in,
I wanted to win so badly.
That was my primary goal,
but another goal was to
beat my previous time,
and I did do that.
And so, [laughs] I mean, it's...
To what extent can we
toggle this relationship
between the prefrontal cortex
and these other more primitive systems?
- Well, an enormous amount.
For example, being low in a hierarchy
is generally bad for health in
like every mammal out there,
including us, but we do something special,
which is we can be part
of multiple hierarchies
at the same time.
And while you maybe low
ranking in one of them,
you could be extremely
high ranking in another,
you're like have the crappiest
job in your corporation,
but you are the captain
of the softball team
this year for the company.
And you better bet that's somebody
who is going to find all sorts of ways
to decide that nine to
five Monday to Fridays,
just stupid paying the bills.
And what really matters is
the prestige on the weekend.
You're poorer, but you're the
deacon of your church here.
And so we can play all sorts of
psychological games with that.
One of the most like consistent,
reliable ones that we do
and need to use the frontal
cortex like crazy is,
somebody does something rotten
and you need to attribute it.
And the answer is, they
did something wrong,
hmm, because they're rotten.
Always have been
or always will be this
constitutional explanation.
You do something rotten to somebody,
and how do you explain it afterward?
A situational one.
I was tired, I was stressed
in this sort of setting,
I misunderstood this.
We're best at excusing
ourselves from bad things
because we have access to our inner lives
and we've got prefrontal cortexes
that are great at coming up
with a situational explanation
rather than, hey, maybe you're just
like a selfish rotten
human, you need to change.
And that's all prefrontal cortex,
and we do that every time,
we don't let somebody merge
in the lane in front of us,
even though you curse somebody
who does the same thing to you and...
Endlessly.
- I love it.
Your statement about the
fact that we can select
multiple hierarchies to participate in.
To me it seems like a particularly
important one nowadays
with social media being so prevalent.
I know you're not particularly
active on social media
although you might be pleasantly,
or I don't know unpleasantly
surprised to find out
that there's a lot of
positive discussion about you
and your work, so you don't
even need to be on there.
We'll just continue to
discuss [laughs] your work.
But what's interesting about
social media I've found
is that the context is very, very broad.
I mean, one could argue that
who one selects to follow
and which news articles
you're reading, etc.
can create a kind of a
funneling of information
that itself can be dangerous.
More verification of crazy ideas
or even just less exposure to new ideas.
But there's also this idea
that social media is an
incredibly broad context.
So as you scroll through
a feed, it's no longer
like being in your eighth grade classroom
or your office or your faculty meeting.
You are being exposed to thousands,
if not millions of contexts,
this meal, that soccer game,
this person's body,
this person's intellect.
YouTube is another example.
It's a vast, vast landscape.
So the context is completely mishmash
whereas I'm assuming we evolved.
I think we did evolve under contexts
that were much more constrained.
We interacted with a limited
number of individuals
and a limited number of different domains,
seasons tended to be constrain us all.
Of course, then we got
phones and televisions,
and this started to expand,
but now more than ever, our
brain, our prefrontal cortex
and our sense of where we exist
in these multiple hierarchies
has essentially wicked out into infinity.
How do you think this might be interacting
with some of these more primitive systems
and other aspects of our biology?
- Well, I think what you get is,
in some ways the punchline of,
what's most human about humans,
which is over and over we
use the exact same blueprint,
the same hormones, the same
kinases, the same receptors,
the same, everything were built
out of the exact same stuff
as all these other species out there,
and then we go and use it
in a completely novel way.
And usually in terms of being able to
abstract stuff over space
and time in dramatic ways.
So, okay, you're a low ranking baboon
and you can feel badly because
you just like killed a rabbit
and you're about to eat
and some higher ranking guy boots you off
and takes it away from you,
and you feel crummy and it's
stressful and you're unhappy.
We are doing the exact same
things with like our brain
and bodies when we're losing
a sense of self-esteem,
but we can do it by watching a
movie character on the screen
and feeling inadequate
compared to like how wonderful
or attractive they are.
We can do it by somebody driving past us
in an expensive car, and we
don't even see their face,
and you can feel belittled by
your own socioeconomic status.
You can watch like the
Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous
or read about what Bezos is up to.
And for some reason, decide
your life is less fulfilling
because you didn't fly
into space for 11 minutes.
And so you can feel miserable
about yourself in ways
that no other organism can,
simply because we can have
our meaningful social networks
include like the party you're
reading about on Facebook
that you weren't invited to
because it's taking place in Singapore,
and you don't know any of those people,
but nonetheless, somehow
that could be a means for you
to feel less content with
who you've turned out to be.
Do you take steps in your own life
to actively restrict the contexts
in which you think and
live and contemplate
in order to enhance your creative life,
your intellectual life?
Are those steps that you actively take?
- Well, I very actively
don't know how to make use
of anything [laughs] with social media.
So I guess that counts as my having thus
actively chosen not to learn how.
So that's the case certainly
for the last year and a half,
like lots of people, I've
gone through stretches
where I've managed to sort
of enforce a moratorium
on looking at the news, and
that was wonderfully freeing.
I think in the larger sense though,
in addition to me being a neurobiologist,
I'd sort of spent decades
spending part of each year
studying wild baboons out in a
national park in East Africa.
And I'd spend three months
a year without electricity,
without phone calls,
with going 12 hours a day
without saying a word to somebody.
And when I finally would,
it would be somebody
nomadic pastoralist guy
in a different language.
Yeah, I did 90% of my
like insightful thinking
about anything in the laboratory
during those three months each year,
and not one in the lab, and
not when inundated with stuff.
- Well, I think there is a shifting trend
towards trying to create a
narrowing of context that...
And I like what I see, I have
a niece, she's 14-years-old
and she and her friends are very good
at putting their phones away.
They say, we're not
going to have our phones
for this interaction, especially after...
And I realized we're
still somewhat in this.
It's unclear where it's headed,
but 2020 was so restrictive
and she was so separated from her friends.
Now it's, let's really
focus on being together
and not bring in all these
other elements from our phones.
And that brings me great hope for
that generation, [laughs]
maybe they will...
Or who knows, maybe they'll
run off and study baboons,
we need more field researchers.
So along the lines of choice,
I'd like to shift gears slightly
and talk about freewill,
about our ability to make choices at all.
- Well, my personal way out in left field
inflammatory stance is,
I don't think we have a shred of freewill
despite 95% of philosophers.
And I think probably the
majority of neuroscientists
are saying that we have freewill
in at least some circumstances.
I don't think there's any at all.
And the reason for this is,
you do something,
you behave, you make a choice, whatever.
And to understand why you did that,
where did that intention come from?
Part of it was due to like
the sensory environment
you were in the previous minute.
Some of it is from the hormone levels
in your bloodstream that morning.
Some of it is from whether
you had a wonderful
or stressful last three months
and what sort of neuroplasticity happened.
Part of it is what hormone levels
you were exposed to as a fetus.
Part of it is what culture
your ancestors came up with,
and thus how you were
parented when you were a kid.
All of those are in there,
and you can understand where
behavior is coming from
without incorporating all of those.
And at that point,
not only are there all of
these relevant factors,
but they're ultimately all one factor.
If you're talking about what evolution
has to do with your behavior,
by definition you're also
talking about genetics.
If you're talking about what your genes
have to do with behavior, by
definition you're talking about
how your brain was constructed
or what proteins are coded for.
If you're talking about
like your mood disorder now,
you're talking about the sense of efficacy
you were getting as a five-year-old.
They're all intertwined.
And when you look at all those influences,
basically like the challenge is,
show me a neuron that
just caused that behavior,
or show me a network of neurons
that just caused that behavior.
And show me that nothing
about what they just did
was influenced by anything
from the sensory environment
one second ago to the
evolution of your species.
And there's no space in there
to fit in a freewill concept
that winds up being in your
brain, but not of your brain.
There's simply no wiggle
room for it there.
- So I can appreciate that our behaviors
and our choices are the
consequences of a long line
of dominoes that fell
prior to that behavior.
But is it possible that I can intervene in
the domino effect, so to speak.
In other words, can my
recognition of the fact
that genes have heritability,
there is an epigenome that,
there is a hormonal context,
there is a historical context.
Can the knowledge of that give me some
small shard of freewill?
Meaning, does it allow me to say, ah,
okay, I accept that my choices
are somewhat predetermined,
and yet knowing that gives me
some additional layer of control?
Is there any philosophical
or biological universe
in which that works?
- Nah.
All of that can produce the
wonderfully positive belief
that change can happen.
Even a traumatic change, even
in the worst of circumstances,
most unlikely people,
and change can happen,
things can change.
Don't be fatalistic, don't decide
because we're a mechanistic,
biological machines
that nothing can ever...
Change can happen,
but where people go off the rails
is translating that into,
we can change ourselves.
We don't, we can't because
there's no freewill.
However, we can be
changed by circumstance.
And the point of it is,
like you look at an Aplysia, a sea slug
that has learned to retract its gill
in response to a shock on its tail,
you can do like conditioning,
Pavlovian conditioning on it,
and it has learned, its
behavior has been changed
by its environment.
And you hear news about something like
horrifically depressing going on,
and refugees in wherever.
And as a result, you feel
a little bit more helpless
and a less of a sense of
efficacy in the world,
and both of your behaviors
have been changed.
Okay, okay, yeah, I guess that,
but the remarkable thing is,
it's the exact same neurobiology.
The signal transduction
pathways that were happening
in that sea snail incorporate
the exact same kinases
and proteases and phosphatases
that we do when you're having
mammalian fear conditioning,
or when you're alert, it's conserved.
It's the exact same thing,
it's simply playing out
in obviously a much, much fancier domain.
And because you have learned
that change is possible
despite understanding mechanistically
that we can't change
ourselves volitionally,
but because you understand
change is possible,
you have just changed
the ability of your brain
to respond to optimistic stimuli.
And you have changed the
ability of your brain
to now send you in the
direction of being exposed to
more information that will seem cheerful
rather than depressing.
Oh my God, that's amazing,
what Nelson Mandela and Martin Luther king
and all these folks did.
Wow, under the most
adverse of circumstances,
they were able to do.
Maybe I can also, maybe I can go read more
about people like them to
get even more data points
of change the neurochemistry,
so that your responses are different now.
And you're tilted a little
bit more in that direction
of feeling like you can make a difference
instead of it's all damn hopeless.
So enormous change can happen,
but the last thing that
could come out of a view of,
we are nothing more or less
than the sum of our biology
and its interactions with environment,
is to throw up your hands and say,
and thus it's no use
trying to change anything.
- So we can acknowledge that
change is extremely hard
to impossible, that
circumstances can change,
and yet that striving to
be better human beings
is still a worthwhile endeavor.
Do I have that correct?
- Absolutely.
Because simply the knowledge,
either from experience
or making it to the end of
the right neurobiology class
has taught you that change can happen
within a framework of a
mechanistic neurobiology.
You were now more open
to being made optimistic
by the good news in the world around you.
You are more likely to be
inspired by this or that,
you were more resistant to
getting discouraged by bad news,
simply because you now
understand it's possible.
- Mm-hmm, yeah, somebody who spent
much of his career working
on the hippocampus,
I have to assume that you are
a believer in neuroplasticity,
that neural circuits can change
in response to experience,
and that some of the same
so-called top-down mechanisms
of prefrontal cortex that
we were talking about before
can play a role there,
that the decision to try and change
and the pursuit of knowledge
and the pursuit of experience
can shape our circuitry,
and therefore make us different
machines, so to speak.
- Yeah.
And not only can say
prenatal hormone exposure
changed the way your brain
is being constructed,
but learning that
prenatal hormone exposure
can change the construction of your brain
will change your brain right now,
and how you think about where
your intentions came from.
Wow, maybe that had
something to do with it.
The knowledge of the
knowledge is an effector
in and of itself.
- That's such an important and
powerful statement to hear.
I think that many people
think that if a tool,
if it doesn't involve
a pill or a protocol,
that it's useless.
And certainly there
are pills and protocols
that are very useful
in a variety of context
for a variety of things, but
the idea that knowledge itself,
whereas you put it, knowledge
of knowledge is itself a tool,
I think is a very important
concept for people
to embed in their minds.
And, listen, I'm so
grateful for this discussion
and for you raising these topics.
I think that people,
many people know your work
on testosterone, on stress,
and we've covered some of that today,
the work on freewill and this
idea that we are hopeless
or that we are in total control.
I think I'm realizing in listening to you
that it's neither is true,
and that the solution resides
in understanding more about freewill
and lack of it, [laughs]
and also neuroplasticity.
You're working on a book about freewill,
are you willing to tell us
a little bit about that book
and where you are in that process
and what we can look forward to?
- Yeah, it's going really slow.
Title is, "Determined: A Science
of Life Without Freewill."
And essentially the
first half of the book is
trying to convince a reader,
okay, if not that there's
no freewill whatsoever,
but at least there's a lot
less than is normally assumed.
And I'm going through all the
standard arguments for freewill,
and why that doesn't make sense
with 21st century science?
And that has led to reading
a lot of very frustrating
philosophers who basically
are willing to admit
that stuff is made out of
like atoms and molecules.
And like there's a physical
reality sort of world,
they're not just relying on magic,
but that they believe in
freewill for magical reasons,
and where it doesn't make sense.
Okay, so the first half of the book is to
hopefully convince people that
there's much less freewill
than we used to think.
And then the second half
is this gigantic juncture
built around the fact
that I haven't thought
there's any freewill since
I was like an adolescent.
And despite thinking that way,
I still have absolutely no idea
how you're supposed to
function with that belief.
How are you supposed to
go about everyday life
if anything you feel
entitled to isn't true?
If any angers and hatreds
you feel aren't justified,
if there's no such thing as appropriate,
blame or punishment or praise or reward,
and none of it makes any sense,
and somebody like even
compliments you on your haircut,
and you've been conditioned
to say, oh, thanks,
as if you had something to do.
How are we supposed to function with that?
And so the second half
is wrestling with that,
and what the punchline there is,
is it's going to be incredibly hard.
And if you think it's going to be hard
to subtract a notion of freewill
out of making sense of
like serial murderers,
it's going to be a thousand times harder
making sense of when somebody
says "good job" to you.
[Andrew laughs]
And because it's the exact
same on reality of sort
of our interpretations.
It's going to be incredibly hard,
but nonetheless when
you look at the history
of how we have subtracted
the notion of agency
out of all sorts of realms of
blame, starting with thinking
that witches caused
hailstorms 500 years ago
to the notion that
psychodynamically screwed up mothers
cause schizophrenia, we've done it.
We've done it endless number of times,
we've been able to subtract
out a sense of volition
in understanding how the
world works around us.
And we don't have murderers
running amuck on the street,
and society hasn't
collapsed into a puddle,
and in fact, it's a more humane society.
So the good news is it's possible
because we've done it
repeatedly in the past,
but it's going to be hard as hell.
And it's hard as hell to try
to write about that coherently,
[laughs] I'm discovering,
so it's going slowly.
- Well, I speak for many,
many people when I say
that we're really excited
for the book when it's done
and we will patiently wait,
but with great excitement
for the book, "Determined".
You said it's the title, correct?
- Yeah, "Determined: The Science
of Life Without Freewill".
It seems like you can't
publish your book these days
without a sub-title, so that's it?
- Fantastic.
Well, very excited to read the book.
I'm very grateful to you
for this conversation today,
I learned a ton.
Every time you speak I learn,
and for me it's really been a pleasure
and a delight to interact with you today
and over the previous years,
I should say, as colleagues.
And thank you again, Robert,
for everything that you do
and all the hard, hard work and thinking
that you put into your work
because it's clear that
you put a lot of hard work
and thinking, and we all
benefit as a consequence.
- Thanks, and thanks for
having me, this was a blast.
- Thank you for joining
me for my conversation
with Dr. Robert Sapolsky.
If you're enjoying this
podcast and learning from it,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
In addition, you can leave
us comments and suggestions
for future episodes and guests
in the Comments section on YouTube.
Please also subscribe
on Apple and on Spotify,
and on Apple you have the
opportunity to leave us
up to a five-star review and a comment.
In addition, please check out the sponsors
that we mentioned at the
beginning of this podcast.
That's a terrific way to support us.
And for those of you
that are interested in
supporting research on stress, on sleep,
and how to better access
sleep and combat stress,
you can do that by supporting the research
being done on those
topics in my laboratory.
You can go to HubermanLab.stanford.edu,
and there you'll see a tab entitled,
Support Research in the Huberman Lab.
So that's for work at the
Huberman Lab at Stanford,
not the Huberman Lab podcast.
And there's a Make a Donation tab
where you can make a
tax deductible donation.
And if you're not already following
the Huberman Lab on Instagram,
please check out Huberman Lab
on Instagram and on Twitter.
On both those channels, I
post information about science
and science related tools
anywhere from one to five minutes.
Some of that information
overlaps with the podcast,
but a lot of it is unique
and different from the
information on this podcast.
And last but not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
[upbeat music]